Why do we need OpenID Connect?
Well, because OAuth is not a federation,
authentication, or identity protocol,
yet it seems to be one of its most popular use cases.
Firstly, let's define identity.
Digital identity is a set of attributes related to an entity.
An entity can be a human, organization, device, a service.
An entity can have multiple digital identities,
which are differentiated by the attributes associated with each.
Take, for example, Victoria.
Her identity at work as an employee is different to
her identity at her fitness center, as a customer,
or to her friends.
Hence, depending on the application she is using,
she will have different identities and restrict what
attributes are available to them.
Now in OAuth, the access token is intended for the resource server,
not the client.
However, because often the tokens are by value,
they can be read by anyone and often contain identity
information intended for the resource server,
like a username to identify the resource owner.
And developers on the client side often notice these details on the access
token and use them to identify the user for authentication.
The issue with this approach is that firstly,
the resource owner might not have consented these
details to be used by the clients.
If the provider made a change to the access token format,
it would break the client.
I've seen this happen, and often the client's dev team would complain when,
in fact, it's their fault.
OAuth clearly states that the access token is intended for the resource server,
not the client.
They should simply pass the token on to the resource
server to access the resource.
Or the client will use the access token to retrieve the user's profile info
and authenticate the bearer of the token as the user.
However, OAuth is a delegation protocol.
If Victoria gives her car keys to valet supervision to park her car
who then delegates the task to another valet,
having the keys in their possession doesn't make the valet Victoria.
An access token can be passed around.
So you can't assume that the bearer is the user.
A malicious client could persuade a user to sign in to
their application with a provider,
then use the token against another client who also uses the same provider,
effectively impersonating the user.
Since the token was valid, the client would authenticate them.
This exploit impacted a popular social media platform.
Many providers solve these problems by building on top of OAuth.
However,
this means that you have to know each provider's
implementation to integrate them with your application.
To resolve this,
OpenID Connect was created to consolidate all these lessons
learned and best practices into a single standard to add authentication and identity to OAuth2.